---
title: U.S. Book Bans 1800-1900
layout: about
permalink: /1800-1900.html
credits: false
---
## U.S. Book Bans 1800-1900 ##

<sup> Jack, Arlene, Vee, Nicole </sup>

The U.S. book bannings within the period of 1800-1900 were heavily characterized by a moral code, one which prohibited materials of sexually explicit nature. The most defining culmination of this social moral code can be seen in the Comstock Act of 1873, which prohibited the mailing or interstate transportation of materials considered “obscene, lewd, or lascivious…” (Sect. 148, The Comstock Act). While the federal law was primarily aimed at confiscating and restricting abortion-related materials such as contraception, it was also heavily impactful on the distribution of printed material and literature. This law showcases the way in which the government targeted materials deemed immoral, especially ones decided to be sexually explicit in nature.

Additionally, the practice of “bowdlerizing” classics rose in the 1800s. Specifically, in 1807, Thomas Bowdler published a “family-friendly” version of Shakespeare’s works that eliminated words deemed inappropriate for families. Thus, “bowdlerizing” became known as heavily editing material to remove content seen as offensive and improper from a text (Pen America). This reflects the general censorship of the 1800s regarding propriety, where book bans targeted immorality and obscenity. 

Moving forward into the 19th century, as abolitionist movements gained traction, abolitionist literature was suppressed in the South through a systemic campaign intended to preserve the institution of slavery by preventing anti-slavery messages. This movement was enforced by possible incarceration for owning a banned book. One lived experience of this was in Maryland when free black minister Samuel Green was “sentenced to 10 years in prison” for possessing a copy of _Uncle Tom’s Cabin_ (National Geographic). Ultimately, this signifies how book banning can be a tool for political suppression, marking a transformative era of censorship that continues to shape American literature. 

Some examples of books banned during this period: _Leaves of Grass_, _Huckleberry Finn_, _The Scarlet Letter_, _Fanny Hill_, _Uncle Tom’s Cabin_.

{% include feature/image.html objectid="coll061" width="75" %}
