---
title: U.S. Book Bans 1940-1969
layout: about
permalink: /1940-1969.html
credits: false
---
## U.S. Book Bans 1940-1969 ##

<sup> Sera, Shelby, Pranav, Ivy </sup>

In the 1940s to 1960s in the U.S., media censorship, of which book bans are a form, was primarily driven by Cold War paranoia (the “Red Scare”) and the early civil rights movement. Political suspicion led to widespread fear, making politicians and citizen groups target books that seem slightly subversive or sympathetic to communism. Censorship covered textbooks, essays, and even seemingly innocent children’s books. Famously, _Robin Hood_ faced calls for censorship in Indiana because the theme of “stealing from the rich and giving to the poor” was viewed as promoting communist ideologies, pushing the “Communist Line” (Eschner). Libraries quickly became battlegrounds for culture, urging librarians to aggressively defend the public’s institutional right to read against waves of censorship (Foerstel).

In 1949, right at the end of WWII, PEN, an international US-based organization, was recognized by the United Nations. It just goes to show how much the world’s leadership respected the “writers of the world”. Additionally, in 1949, George Orwell’s _Nineteen Eighty-Four_ was published, which brought to light the ideas of government censorship and control, an appealing topic to the rebellious ideas of the Civil Rights Movement. As the 1950s transitioned into the 1960s, book bans turned to target obscenity and the Civil Rights Movement. The era witnessed obscenity trials like the 1957 case against Lawrence Ferlinghetti for publishing Allen Ginsberg’s controversial poem "Howl." In the end the judge ruled that the poem was not obscene because it had “redeeming social importance” (Collins and Skover). Notably, in 1959, segregationists targeted Garth Williams’ _The Rabbit’s Wedding_, claiming that the book promoted themes of interracial marriage. Ultimately, this era of book-banning represents a clash between the deeply conservative and socially liberal era in the U.S.

{% include feature/image.html objectid="coll061" width="75" %}
