---
title: U.S. Book Bans 1970-1999
layout: about
permalink: /1970-1999.html
credits: false
---
## U.S. Book Bans 1970-1999 ##

<sup> Youyi, Sabella, Ashlyn, Rachel </sup>

Book bans have a long history that begins even before the United States was formed. Works were often banned for content that was deemed subversive or inappropriate for society, and this trend extends to book bans in the United States. Initially, books were “banned” in the form of public burnings, but eventually took on the form we know in modern times: removals from libraries, collections, or schools. 

In the 1970s, books were primarily banned for promoting “anti-family” and “anti-Christian” values (“Manuscripts”). This came during a time when the Jim Crow Laws were just banned, and segregation had just ended, so social tensions were quite high, with oppressive structures being upheld by social convention and technically not the law. During this time in the United States, a conservative movement took place in the United States with the rise of President Ronald Reagan. A key driver of this conservative movement was the Moral Majority, which was a political organization that actively campaigned against books they viewed as corrupt or anti-Christian. Books with topics including profanity, sexual content, LGBTQ topics, gender roles, and racial injustice were often banned. This was also during the time of the Cold War, and anti-war books were also deemed as challenging the status-quo, and deemed as anti-American. Part of the anti-Christian movement was the Occult scare, where people were trying to ban books containing witchcraft, such as _A Wrinkle in Time_ and _The Witches_.

In 1982, the US Supreme Court addressed censorship in Island Trees School District vs Pico, a case involving a school board’s decision to remove certain books it considered inappropriate for a school library. Five students challenged the removal, arguing that it violated their First Amendment rights. The Court ruled that while school boards have broad authority over educational matters, they cannot remove library books simply because they disagree with the ideas expressed in them, as school libraries play a unique role in providing access to diverse ideas, therefore decisions about book removals must not be driven by partisan or political motives.


{% include feature/image.html objectid="coll061" width="75" %}
