---
title: U.S. Book Bans 2000-2026
layout: about
permalink: /2000-2026.html
credits: false
---
## U.S. Book Bans 2000-2026 ##

<sup> Rudy, Abby, Tanay, Caroline </sup>

Book bans refer to the removal of books from schools or libraries based on certain content. These bans are driven by concerns over a variety of topics, which more recently target sex, race, and gender. Many of these bans are initiated by parents, politicians, or advocacy groups aiming to shield students from the contents in books. According to the American Library Association, data shows that challenges of titles surged 65% in 2023 compared to 2022, reaching the highest level ever. From these challenges, books containing LGBTQIA+ and BIPOC made up 47% of these censorship attempts (“Research Guides: Banned Books: Freedom to Read: Data & Reports”). 

Book bans between 2000 and 2010 targeted schools and public libraries with a focus on children's and young adult books. Most of the cases were from local fights from parents or community groups that would try and get a book removed or restricted from local  libraries  and schools typically for moral, religious, or political reasons. The most common books banned from 2010-2020+ are primarily associated with LGBTQ+ content, race, sexually explicit scenes, and depictions of violence. The book that tops the list from the American Library Associations Top 100 Most Banned Books in the past Decade is _The Absolutely True Diary of a Part-Time Indian_. Many states have passed laws requiring school districts to restrict library materials that include LGBTQ+, racism and sexual explicit content. There are many different reasons for these bans but what they all have in common is that this censorship violates our First Amendment rights. By bringing awareness to this censorship, we can fight back against book bans and regain control of our rights. 



{% include feature/image.html objectid="coll061" width="75" %}
